INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

Toolkit on disability for AFRICA

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.	OVERVIEW..................................................................................................................................................... 1
2.	 TECHNICAL CONTENT.......................................................................................................................... 3
2.A	Background..............................................................................................3
2.B	 Legal Framework......................................................................................4
2.C	 Making ICT Inclusive for Persons with Disabilities......................................... 6
2.D	 Policy Tools to Promote Inclusive ICT for Persons with Disabilities............11
	

Country Checkpoint................................................................................11

2.E	 Promoting ICT Accessibility with DPOs....................................................15

3.	 SUMMARY & KEY LEARNING POINTS...................................................................................17
4.	 USEFUL RESOURCES..........................................................................................................................18
4.B. Appendix A: Specific Applications and Services for Various Types of
Disabilities and Situations........................................................................20

5.	 LEARNING ACTIVITIES......................................................................................................................22
Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 1............................23
Learning Activity 2.A: The Importance of ICTs...........................................24
Learning Activity 2.B: Member States’ Obligations on the Provision of ICT... 25
Handout: CRPD Article 2: Definitions......................................................26
Handout: CRPD Article 9: Accessibility....................................................27
Handout: CRPD Article 21: Freedom of Expression and Opinion, and
Access to Information.............................................................................28
Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 2............................29
Learning Activity 2.C.: Fostering Social Inclusion.....................................30

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

iii

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Acknowledgements
The Division for Social Policy and Development (DSPD) would like to thank all those who
contributed to the Toolkit on Disability for Africa, including the United Nations Office for
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Economic Commission for Africa
(ECA), the International Labour Office (ILO), the International Training Centre - ILO (ITCILO),
the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Union and the governments of Kenya,
South Africa and Zambia. DSPD also wishes to thank the Government of Italy for its
financial support and the numerous African Disabled Peoples Organizations (DPOs) who
contributed substantial input to the Toolkit.

iv

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

List of acronyms
AT	

Assistive Technology

CEDAW	

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women

CEDAW	

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women

CESCR	

Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

CRPD	

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

CRPD	

Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

CRC	

Committee on the Rights of the Child

CRC 	

Convention on the Rights of the Child

CRC 	

Convention on the Rights of the Child

DFIs	

Development Financing Institutions

DPOs	

Disabled Persons Organizations

DSPD	

Division for Social Policy and Development/UNDESA

EC	

European Commission

G3ICT	

Global Initiative for Inclusive ICTs

HIV/AIDS	

Human Immunodeficiency virus / Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

ICCPR	

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

ICESCR	

International Covenant on Economic and Cultural Rights

ICF	

International Classification of Function, The World Health Organization

ICT	

Information and Communication Technology

ILO	

International Labour Organization

ITCILO	

International Training Centre of the ILO

IPU	

Inter-Parliamentary Union

ITC	

Information and Communication Technology

ITU	

International Telecommunication Union

MDGs	

Millennium Development Goals

MFIs	

Microfinance institutions

MSPs	

Multi-stakeholder Partnerships

NAPs	

National Action Plans

NGO	

Non-Governmental Organization

NVDA	

Non Visual Desktop Access

OHCHR	

Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

OSISA 	

Open Society Initiative for Southern Africa

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

v

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

vi

PCM	

Project Cycle Management

PRP	

Protracted Relief Programme

SABE	

Self-Advocates Becoming Empowered

SDGs	

Sustainable Development Goals

UDHR	

Universal Declaration of Human Rights

UN	

United Nations

UN DESA	

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

UNAIDS	

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS

UNDP	

United Nations Development Fund

UNESCO	

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNICEF	

United Nations Children's Fund

USAID	

United States Agency for International Development

VOCA	

Voice Output Communication Aids

WHO	

World Health Organization

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

1.	OVERVIEW
Module objectives
►► To highlight the role of information and communication technologies (ICT) in
fostering the social inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of life.

Who is this module for?
This module is relevant to everyone who has an interest in disability or a responsibility
for addressing issues of disability because of the nature of their work, including persons
with or without disabilities in civil society, civil and public service, national human rights
institutions, parliaments, development agencies, universities and the private sector.

What is this module about?
This module:

►► examines the role of ICTs in the inclusion of persons with disabilities;
►► reviews the accessibility barriers that limit their access and usage;
►► reviews key provisions of the CRPD promoting ICT usage for persons with
disabilities, ICT accessibility and assistive technologies;

►► describes how information and communication technologies (ICTs) offer

opportunities for fostering the social inclusion of persons with disabilities in all
aspects of life;

© ILO/A.Fiorente

►► identifies approaches for making ICT inclusive for persons with disabilities;
►► highlights key areas of policy-making to implement relevant CRPD requirements;
►► provides guidance on key success factors for implementation;
►► includes learning exercises to accompany the material; and
►► lists key resources for additional reference.

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

1

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Learning objectives
On completion of this module, participants will have:
1.

reflected on what information and communication technologies (ICTs) are, and
how they contribute to the inclusion of persons with disabilities;

2.

discussed the key provisions of the CRPD promoting ICT usage;

3.

considered Member States’ responsibilities for the provision of ICT for persons
with disabilities;

4.

described how ICTs can foster the social inclusion of persons with disabilities in
all aspects of life;

5.

identified approaches for making ICT inclusive for persons with disabilities.

Module map
1. OVERVIEW

2. TECHNICAL
CONTENT

2.A Background

2.D Policy Tools to
Promote Inclusive
ICT for Persons with
Disabilities

2.C Making ICT
Inclusive for Persons
with Disabilities

2.B Legal Framework

2.E Pomoting ICT
Accessibility with
DPOs

2

3. Summary &
Key Learning
Points

4. Useful
Resources

5. Learning
Activities

4.B Appendix A: Specific
Applications &
Services for Various
Types of Disabilities
and Situations

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

2.	 TECHNICAL CONTENT
2.A	Background
Definition
ICT (Information and Communications Technology - or Technologies) include any
communication device or application such as radio, television, cellular phones, computers,
satellite systems as well as network hardware and software and associated services.

Information and communication technologies (ICT), when accessible and available, can
serve as critical enablers that allow persons with disabilities to realise full and effective
opportunities to participate, on the basis of equality, in all aspects of society and
development.2 ICTs can help persons with disabilities have a greater access to knowledge
and independent living. However, there are a few principles that should be taken into
consideration while introducing ICTs. Whether one is considering the respective needs
of rich and poor, rural and urban, those with access to the internet and those without
(the digital divide), ICT has the power to bring people together but, where persons with
disabilities lack access to ICTs, they can also leave people behind. Wi-Fi access is essential,
as is access to a stable electrical supply. Technology advances quickly and ICT can quickly
become obsolete (and examples provided given in the present module may also quickly
become dated).

See Learning Activity 2.A. titled The Importance of ICTs

There are general basic principles that should be applied in respect of ICT and disability;
first, ICTs needs to be accessible to all persons and not just to persons with disabilities. All
persons ought to be able to access ICTs that help facilitate communication in different
cultural, educational, and professional situations. Another principle is that particular
forms or approaches to ICT should reflect the goal of fostering greater participation
and inclusion. Where possible, technologies ought to be designed to be as inclusive as
possible of everybody, as opposed to further development of certain technologies that
would only be used specifically by persons with disabilities.
A further important principle relates to the level of independence and control persons
with disabilities have in their use of ICTs. Indeed all people, including those with
disabilities, have personal preferences for particular technologies and ought to be able to
choose the ICT that best serves them.
These general principles may guide decisions about the types of technologies that should
be used.

	
	

1
2

http://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/ICT-information-and-communications-technology-or-technologies
United Nations Expert Group Meeting on Building Inclusive Society and Development through Promoting ICT
Accessibility: Emerging Issues and Trends (Tokyo Japan, 19-21 April 2012), available at:
http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=46&pid=1596#backgroundnote

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

3

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

2.B	

Legal Framework

A remarkable aspect of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) is
the way it identifies the need to ensure the accessibility of ICTs and the promotion of the
usage of ICTs and assistive technologies for persons with disabilities.
Accessibility is one of eight fundamental principles3 in the CRPD. It is defined as a
precondition for persons with disabilities to enjoy all rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the rights to life and liberty, education, employment, cultural materials, sports
and entertainment, political participation and movement.
Article 9 of the CRPD
For the first time in the history of disability law, Article 9 of the CRPD specifically highlights
the obligation of Member States to ensure access to information and communication
technologies (ICTs) at large on a par with the physical environment and transportation,
thereby acknowledging the importance and universality of ICT application across all
domains of life in today’s information age.

See Learning Activity 2.B. titled
Member States’ Obligations on the Provision of ICT

The Importance of Access to ICT in the CRPD
Article 9 of the Convention explicitly articulates the right of persons with disabilities to
access information and communications technologies on an equal basis and without
discrimination. Furthering the definition of accessibility including ICTs, “Communication”
is defined by the Convention as “including all possible means of communication that
may eliminate barriers; the term includes languages, display of text, braille, tactile
communication, large print, accessible multimedia as well as written, audio, plainlanguage, human-reader and augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats
of communication, including accessible information and communications technologies”
(Article 2). The CRPD also calls on Member States to encourage the private sector to deliver
accessible products and services. It recommends provision of reasonable accommodation4
and states that denial of reasonable accommodation itself is a form of discrimination.
Accessibility provisions include general ICT accessibility requirements as per Article 9 as well as
domain-specific accessibility stipulations found in different articles. These can be implemented
by Member States through the adoption of a variety of measures targeted on holistic solutions
both by framing and amending policies to make them inclusive, and by formulating specific
policies to emphasise the need for accessibility. For instance, on the one hand the national
policy for information and communication technology or e-governance should include a
provision which identifies accessibility as one of the principles of the policy with specific
strategies to address it, while on the other hand Member States may also formulate a separate
policy which addresses in detail various aspects of ICT accessibility such as website or content
accessibility, and clearly adopts standards and mandates adherence.
	
	

3
4

4

Article 3 of the Convention.
According to Art. 2 of the CRPD, “Reasonable accommodation means necessary and appropriate modification
and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to
ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms;” http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=262

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Specific Provisions on ICT Accessibility – Examples of Implementation
Some of the CRPD’s specific provisions on ICT accessibility direct State parties to the
following:
Provision

Example

Ensure that persons with disabilities have
equal access to the physical environment,
transportation, information and
communications, including information and
communications technologies and systems
(Article 9)

Examples of implementation include
amending building by-laws to include
physical accessibility stipulations, adopting
mandatory national standards for web
accessibility and rolling out large-scale
training programmes for developers of public
websites on web accessibility

Promote research, development and
availability of new technologies suitable for
persons with disabilities at affordable cost
that will facilitate living and inclusion within
the community; this includes ICTs, mobility
aids, devices and assistive technologies.
(Article 4 (G))

An example of this would be for Member
States to customise existing assistive
technologies in local languages and make
them available at no or affordable costs.

Provide all information and communication
in accessible formats, including cultural
materials and television (Article 30)

Member States can do this by amending
their Copyright Acts to permit conversion
of all books into accessible formats for the
benefit of persons with disabilities without
the necessity of seeking permission, ensuring
that all curriculum and publications are
available in accessible electronic text and
Braille/large print, promoting captioning for
television serials, etc.

Promote accessibility of education, which
include modes of communications, assistive
technology etc. (Article 24)

This can be done by ensuring that adequate
policies and programmes are launched
to provide children in primary and higher
education centres with access to assistive
technology, accessible content, trained
teachers and resource centres

Ensure the right to work and employment on
an equal basis with others, providing a just
favourable and equitable work environment
(Article 27).

Member States should actively promote
equal opportunity work policies and the
employment of persons with disabilities
in both the public and private sectors and
provide support to employers for workplace
accommodation.

Make international cooperation accessible
to persons with disabilities and promote
the sharing of accessible and assistive
technologies.5 (Article 32)

One example would be for countries to sign
and ratify the Marrakesh Treaty6 to promote
international exchange of books in accessible
formats.

For instance, a project to customise the open
source text-to-speech synthesiser e-Speak
into any African language is a project which
should take about 8-10 months and would
immediately render indigenous voices available
free of cost for bundling with screen readers
such as NVDA or with mobile phones. Not only
would this open up communication for those
who cannot afford commercial screen readers
or do not know English, but would also benefit
non-disabled rural and illiterate mobile users.

	http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=259	
	http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/marrakesh/

5
6

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

5

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

2.C	 Making ICT Inclusive for Persons with Disabilities
This section will start by giving a few examples of the kinds of situation which hinder
access for persons with disabilities and then describe how these can be addressed.

zz You wake up in the morning and couldn’t read your clock or agenda on your
mobile phone.
zz You are watching television, but cannot hear what the people on the screen are
saying.
zz You want to call your mobile service provider to enquire about your mobile bill, but
are confronted with an interactive automated system which you cannot hear or
understand and there is no one you can talk to.
zz A fire breaks out in your building but you are trapped inside alone because you
couldn’t hear the evacuation announcement.
zz You cannot read Automated Teller Machine (ATM) instructions or cannot reach the
keyboard from your wheelchair and must give your PIN number to a stranger to
retrieve cash at an ATM.
zz You are trying to find information about a government service online but
cannot read the document as it is an image file which your screen reader cannot
understand and you cannot see the screen on your own.
zz You are trying to navigate a web page but the constant flickering makes it difficult
for you to concentrate and the complex layout of the information makes it difficult
for you to understand what is being communicated.

ICT Inclusivity
ICTs have become the leading medium for communicating, transacting, informing,
educating and entertaining all over the world. Usage of technologies such as television,
radio, fixed and especially mobile telephony, has become a basic and indispensable
feature in the lives of people across the globe. Subscriptions to mobile services worldwide
are estimated to total seven billion at the end of 2015, of which 10% were in Africa.
Internet usage has fast expanded with an estimate of over three billion users in 2015, of
which 20% are in Africa. Every country and region of the world is benefiting from ICT’s
opportunities for economic and social development. It is hence imperative to ensure that
persons with disabilities are not excluded from the use and benefits of ICTs.
A recent report issued for the High Level Meeting on Disability and Development held at
the United Nations in September 2013 ranks the importance of ICTs for the inclusion of
persons with disabilities as follows7:

See Learning Activity 2.C. titled
Fostering Social Inclusion

	

7

6

Source: ITU-G3ict-IDA-UNESCO-Microsof Report “The ICT Opportunity for Persons with Disabilities”	

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Scale: 5 = most important to
Websites Mobiles
1 = least important

TV sets

Radio

Other

Healthcare

3.3

3.1

2.9

2.5

2.7

Primary education

3.0

2.6

2.8

2.3

2.9

Secondary education

3.4

3.0

2.7

2.3

2.8

Tertiary, prof., lifelong education

3.7

3.4

2.9

2.4

2.8

Employment

3.7

3.3

2.5

2.2

2.7

Independent living

3.4

4.6

2.8

2.4

2.8

Government services

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.3

2.6

Participation: Political & public life

3.3

3.1

2.7

2.5

2.6

While ICTs and ICT applications and services can raise insurmountable barriers if
not designed in an accessible way, new ICT solutions can also bring unprecedented
supportive solutions for persons with disabilities: text-to-speech helps millions access
the digital version of otherwise inaccessible print documents, GPS technology, image
recognition, near field communications and Internet connectivity are new generating
technologies supporting multiple innovations for independent living. The table above
shows how much mobile technologies in particular contribute to the empowerment of
persons with disabilities.
For ICTs to fulfil their promises for persons with disabilities and for Member States to
comply with the CRPD, ICTs must be developed and deployed in a manner that is
accessible to accommodate all types of impairment. The practical question for policymakers is what those accessible solutions are. And since different groups face different
challenges, how can all the different considerations be incorporated, especially if different
requirements are needed (for instance the blind need audio or tactile output, while the
deaf need texts or graphics). An additional crucial consideration is that, in the African
context, particularly in rural areas, access to electricity - which is often required for the
use of ICTs - may be lacking,.

ICTs Accessibility Basic Principles
Remarkably, solutions exist and have in fact been implemented around the world
addressing most disabilities. This section briefly explains what ICT accessibility and
assistive technologies are and the importance of specific standards which have been
developed for different technologies, services and content. In general, ICT products,
content and services can be made accessible to most users with disabilities if there
is provision for alternative modes of interaction; outputs in multiple possible formats;
customization of configuration and settings; and compatibility with assistive technology.
Accessible interfaces are characterized by three basic principles. The user must be able to:

►► perceive it (awareness and access to contents displayed);
►► understand it (know what it means and how to interact with it);
►► operate it (be able to interact with it in a certain way to produce intended/desired
results).

To design accessible ICTs it is essential to consider the user perspective in all aspects
- from the way equipment is designed to its use and where it is located or placed. The
e-Accessibility Policy Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities defines ‘accessibility’ as:
Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

7

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

A measure of the extent to which a product or service can be used by a person with a disability
as effectively as it can be used by a person without that disability’8.
In simple terms, a product is accessible if it can be used by everyone equally, including
persons with all types of disability. While the task of ensuring that a product or service is
completely accessible may sound challenging, it need not necessarily be so. For instance,
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) standard of merely providing a raised
dot on the number 5 on the numeric key pad of phones is a great accessibility aid for
blind persons to navigate and use phones. Similarly providing textual descriptions for
images on websites (to aid blind persons using screen readers or persons with cognitive
or comprehension problems) or pictorial address books, and text or video messaging
service for the illiterate or deaf respectively, are extremely critical and easy accessibility
features which can be incorporated without much difficulty.

Assistive technologies
On the other hand, certain types of disability require that assistive technologies be used
to facilitate the interaction of the user with the ICT device. This may include alternative
input devices for persons with reduced mobility, screen readers for visually impaired
persons, augmentative (used to supplement natural speech rather than replacing it)
and alternative (non-speech) communications solutions for speech- or writing-impaired
persons, or icon-based interfaces for cognitively-impaired users, to name a few. Typically,
the provision of assistive technologies requires a significant amount of service by
qualified professionals including user assessment, selection of solutions, training, support
and maintenance. Assistive technologies are primarily promoted through schools and
universities, rehabilitation centres and as part of workplace accommodation services. In
some cases persons with disabilities have access to these technologies while they are
within these facilities, but not during the portions of their day they spend elsewhere.
When those assistive technologies interact with devices and electronic content, issues
of interoperability are critically important: the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines of
the Worldwide Web Consortium, for instance, covers a wide range of disabilities and
interaction. A screen reader can only read a web page if its content is designed and edited
in an accessible format. A switch used by a paralyzed user may only operate if a web
application allows full control via the traditional keyboard of a computer.
While assistive technologies cover a wide spectrum of solutions, increasingly applications
are being developed to address a variety of daily living needs which can be downloaded
and used with mobile phones. Some examples of accessibility and supportive features for
different disabilities are given in Appendix A.

8

	

e-Accessibility Policy Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities, available at
http://www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org/toolkit/eaccessibility_basics/accessibility_and_the_purposes_of_icts

	

8

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Making the National Information Infrastructure Inclusive of
Persons with Disabilities
As the usage of ICTs become pervasive, policy makers can considerably improve the lives
of persons with disabilities by ensuring that their national information infrastructure is
made accessible. Such approach does not create additional cost to governments other
than ensuring that the proper standards and methods are implemented by service
providers, e-government agencies and by leading private sector content providers.
Channel
Mobile
Phones

Description

Intervention areas

Mobile phones are a critical tool for
persons with disabilities: they provide
instantaneous access to information
anytime at any location. The success
of the mobile phone in Africa and
the increasing number of mobilebased services available to citizens
across the continent underscore the
importance of making mobile phones
and services accessible and useful to
persons with disabilities. There are four
primary areas in which accessibility
interventions can be made – handset,
software, services and content.

Handset accessibility can be achieved through:
1.	 General features available on any phone such as visual or vibrating
alerts and adjustable volume control for persons with hearing
disabilities; tactile indicators such as the raised dot on the number
5 to aid in orientation and navigation for persons with blindness
and low vision; voice recognition, auto text and touch screen for
persons with dexterity problems, etc.
2.	 Specific exclusive features such as screen readers, text-to-speech
software and screen magnifiers, and candy bar design to avoid
extra movements.
Software Accessibility can come either bundled with the operating
system of the handset itself e.g. Android’s screen reader Talk Back,
Windows Eyes with Microsoft Office, or via third party applications for
screen reading as well as different functions.
Services: Examples of services and facilities which can be used by
persons with disabilities include digital libraries for the blind like
Open Library, Relay services enabling deaf communication over the
phone, and also mainstream services such as multimedia and text
messaging, video conferencing, captioning (phones such as i phones
support playing of movies with captioning) etc., are also very useful.
Additionally, even customer care services shouldbe accessible to
persons with disabilities.
Content: While mobile phones offer a means of accessing content
over the internet and via phone, it is important that these should
adhere to web accessibility standards such as WCAG 2.0. For example,
bill payments in accessible formats, advertisements including
voice, text and multimedia as per the choice of the user, video and
audio clips on U-tube and television with captions/subtitles and
descriptions, will be completely accessible to persons with disabilities.9

Television

Television cannot be enjoyed by
persons with vision and hearing
impairments since its usefulness
is dependent on sight and sound.
Accessibility of TV10 requires universal
design.
The two main areas deserving attention
to make TV viewing accessible are
the equipment and the programme
content.

Captions/Subtitles: Words displayed on a television screen that
interprets the audio of a programme to let viewers who are deaf or
hard of hearing understand the dialogue and action of a programme
at the same time. Captions are of two types, closed (set by decoder
and optional to viewer) and open (always on)
Tele-text: refers to the inclusion of text information (News, Weather,
Closed Captions etc.) by encoding it within a broadcast television
signal. Special decoders or TV sets with integrated tele-text decoders
can receive and display the data on the TV screen.
Sign language: Sign language interpretation comprising the use
of manual gestures, facial expression and body language to convey
meaning is useful for people who are deaf and for whom sign is their
primary language.
Audio description: audio description describes what is happening
on the screen. This could be changes of location, actions, facial
expressions, gestures and so on to convey the context and set the
scene. They are inserted between dialogues to avoid interrupting the
flow of the programme.
Equipment accessibility: includes accessibility of the remote control
(simple and easy to use) and the set-top box both in terms of the
remote control as well as the content - a visually impaired user should
for instance have the option of obtaining audio feedback while
navigating through the menu.

ITU and G3ict, “Making Mobile Phones and Services Accessible for Persons with Disabilities”, available at
http://cis-india.org/accessibility/making-mobile-phone-and-services-accessible-for-persons-with-disabilities.pdf
10
	 Based on Making Television Accessible Report by ITU’ and G3ict available at
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/sis/PwDs/Documents/ITU-G3ict%20Making_TV_Accessible_Report_November_2011.pdf
9

	

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

9

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Channel
Internet

Description

Intervention areas

Web accessibility11 is critical for persons
with disabilities, as an inaccessible
website cannot be read irrespective of any
available assistive technology.

Some important web accessibility considerations are:

For a website to be accessible, it must
adhere to the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG) 2.012 formulated
by the World Wide Web Consortium,
which form the universal basis for web
accessibility. The WCAG 2.0 is based on 4
principles13:

►► Creation of links to skip to content can provide persons using

Perceivable: the user must be able to
perceive the content through the senses
- sight or hearing - either through the
browser or with assistive technology such
as screen readers.

►► Text descriptions and explanations should be provided for

images and graphics on web pages so that they can be read by
screen readers.
screen readers with a huge relief for from listening to a whole
lot of useless or confusing content.

►► Every function which has to be executed with a mouse should
have a keyboard alternative.

►► Links without any specific destination or without references

such as “click here” should be avoided; there should not be sole
reliance on colours to convey meanings.

►► Since screen readers read content as it is in the code, web-page
creators should ensure that content is read correctly on the
page as well as in the code.

Operable: users should be able to interact
with all controls and perform all functions
through the keyboard, mouse or a
supportive device.
Understand: users should understand the
function/ content and how to use it.
Robust: a wide range of technologies and
user agents should be able to access the
content.
E-Publishing

There are several standards for document
accessibility such as Daisy and e-Pub,
or even basic HTML or text which are
completely accessible to persons using
assistive technology.
As a priority, such standards should
be implemented in education and
government.

Daisy14 stands for Digital Accessible Information System and is an
international accessible multimedia publishing system. It provides
digital books to persons with print disabilities in an accessible,
feature-rich and navigable format. While other e-texts are in a single
format, a Daisy book can include multiple formats such as text,
audio and a combination of both and now even starting on video
Daisy allows a reader to directly navigate to parts of a book such as
headings, paragraphs, chapters etc.
EPUB15 is the file extension of an XML format for reflowable digital
books and publications, produced by the IDPF (International Digital
Publishing Forum). EPUB allows publishers to produce and send
a single digital publication file through distribution and offers
consumers interoperability between software and hardware for
unencrypted reflowable digital books and other publications. EPUB 3
incorporates DAISY accessibility features16 and should be promoted
to the greatest possible extent by State parties to the CRPD to
facilitate access to e-books by persons with disabilities.
The portable document format (PDF) can be made accessible
using Adobe Acrobat 9 pro or by saving as fully accessible
documents. The PDF/UA (PDF/Universal Accessibility) is the informal
name for ISO 14289, the International Standard for accessible PDF
technology.

	
	
13
	
14
	
15
	
16
	
11
12

10

www.w3.org/WAI/
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
http://webaim.org/articles/pour/
http://www.daisy.org
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB
http://www.daisy.org/daisypedia/epub-daisy-standards-under-revision

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Emergency Response and Disaster Preparedness
Persons with disabilities are one of the most disadvantaged communities during times
of emergency, since the communications divide, coupled with inaccessible response
systems, facilities and services makes it impossible for them to be included in any
emergency or disaster service. Apart from ensuring the physical accessibility of shelters,
services and transportation, for which there exist guidelines and best practices, ICTs play a
critical role in this domain.
A whole range of ICTs exist to carry out emergency communication, such as television
and radio, fixed and mobile telephony, text messaging and SMS, and internet-based
resources and services such as websites, video, instant messaging over the Internet,
Voice over Internet Protocol services, web conferencing, social media which allow for
instant communications, instant photo and video capture and sharing, and satellite
communications. The biggest benefit to using ICTs for disaster preparedness and
planning is hence the ability to create and deliver content in multiple formats through
multiple media.
Ensuring that all emergency communications are accessible is a critical obligation of
Member States of the CRPD. In Japan, statistics show that the death toll among persons
with disabilities during the most recent tsunami was more than twice the death toll of the
general population, often due to lack of awareness of the impending disaster.

2.D	 Policy Tools to Promote Inclusive ICT for Persons
with Disabilities
One common misbelief encountered in many countries, which hinders the progress
of ICT accessibility, is the idea that implementing accessibility is the exclusive task of
the Ministry in charge of the disabled and social welfare since it relates to persons
with disabilities. However, given the fact that ICT usage cuts across and commonly
binds together implementation strategies for all spheres of activity - be it education,
employment, health, social welfare, transportation or finance - the implementation
of accessibility will naturally fall independently within the purview of each separate
Ministry. To have a comprehensive solution to accessibility needs in a country, the
government must consider both including it within the overarching national framework
for information and technology, identifying it as a strategy in all relevant policies and
legislation such as education, as well as creating the necessary exclusive policies to
address accessibility issues in greater detail, such as having a national policy on electronic
accessibility.
Country Checkpoint
1.	 Is ICT mentioned in your country’s main Policy Act that addresses disability?
2.	 Does the main Policy Act on information and communication technology address issues
of disability or are the words ‘accessibility’ or ‘universal design’ mentioned?

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

11

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Some important measures to promote ICT accessibility are described below:

Public Procurement
Public procurement can be used as an important tool for implementing accessibility within
the national ICT ecosystem. It can be justly argued that what is procured from public funds,
or is used by or for the public in any way, must necessarily be usable and accessible to every
member of the public. Requiring specific accessible ICT technical design standards helps
ICT vendors focus on accessibility as part of mainstream design requirements. It can also
help foster innovation through competition, consequently lowering costs and building local
capacity to produce accessible goods and services. There are many different types of public
procurements, varying from a single item purchase such as a computer or landline phone
to a service contract such as designing a website and different approaches (for instance
accessibility statements/mandatory training including accessibility as part of contract terms
etc.), which are suitable for different types of procurement. Several countries such as the
United States, Denmark, Ireland, and Canada have brought out ICT procurement toolkits.

Licensing
Including accessibility as a precondition of a licence can be an effective way of ensuring
accessibility of a product or service. For instance, in Sri Lanka telecom service providers
are required to provide accessibility to emergency services to persons with disabilities
under their service licence. Ofcom in the United Kingdom applies the same principle for
the licensing of operators. This is usually implemented, in the case of telecommunications
services, by the telecommunications regulator. Similarly, in all other government contracts
or licences, governments may include accessibility as necessary criteria, especially in the
issue of wireless and broadcast licences. Breech of licence terms can result in termination
of contract or imposition of penalty with a time frame to ensure compliance.

Incentives
There are a variety of ways through which governments can implement ICT accessibility
amongst their ministries and departments, as well as industry actors. These could be in
the form of mandatory policies, negative measures such as imposing a penalty for nonadherence, or positive measures such as offering incentives such as tax breaks, preferred
choice in tenders, instituting awards etc. In general, the preferred approach could be to
incentivize voluntary adherence. Some of the ways in which innovation and investments
by organizations in ICT accessibility can be supported by the government include:

►► Matching funds. Governments can offer to match funds to purchase certain

assistive technologies. For instance, in the U.S, the federal government matches
funds for the state governments to provide assistive technologies (ATs) for
persons with disabilities. Another example could be to match funds for academic
institutions purchasing these technologies.

►► Centralized budgets in governments or other organizations to pay for

accommodation so that individual agencies or departments are not concerned
about cost of ATs when hiring persons with disabilities (currently implemented at
IBM and Microsoft internally).

►► Tax breaks for investments in ATs.

12

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

►► Consolidating government needs so that software companies have an incentive
to invest in localizing AT.

►► Direct subsidy of end-users for their purchase of ATs Incentives (ADIP scheme by

the Indian Government subsidizes purchase of ATs for all persons with disabilities
up to INR 6000).

►► Institute awards for employers of persons with disabilities or in different domains
of accessibility such as the most accessible website servicing persons with
disabilities.

Welfare and Health Insurance Programs
In several countries, national and State-level programmes fund the medical and
rehabilitation needs of persons with disabilities. For instance, Medicare17 is a national
social insurance programme administered by the U.S. federal government for adults over
65 years of age and younger people with disabilities which provides coverage for some
kinds of ATs. However insurance companies do not often mention coverage of ATs except
in some cases when they are medically required.
In countries where such public health insurance programmes are limited, there is often
little or negligible budget for providing social security or purchasing rehabilitative devices,
or they may be restricted to prosthetic limbs or crutches but may not extend to ICT-based
devices. The situation with insurance companies is also dismal, with very few or almost no
companies funding purchase of ATs and even requiring persons with disabilities to pay a
higher premium even if they wanted to insure their own person. There is a dire need and
potential for government to play a role in ensuring that there is provision to support every
person with a disability by equipping them with the necessary AT and training in its use.

Education, Training and Awareness-Raising
In addition to different measures, there also needs to be a multi-pronged approach in
terms of strategies. Government authorities must spend time, effort and money variously
on raising awareness among their own employees and the public of the need to create an
inclusive and barrier-free society; sensitise their staff to respond to the needs of persons
with disabilities; carry out capacity-building activities such as accessibility training to
facilitate implementation of accessibility; include accessibility in the curriculum of training
institutions to make way for long term integration; audit existing and new programmes
for accessibility and regularly monitor its implementation; support DPOs and NGOs
in aiding persons with disabilities; engage in research and development of low-cost
indigenous supportive solutions in local languages to cater to local needs; and build up
the capacity of trainers and resource centres to train people in using these technologies.
This life cycle of accessibility implementation and integration needs to be followed
through in each domain of activity. For instance, if one is talking of implementing
web accessibility across all government websites, the various steps which need to be
undertaken are as follows:

►► Carry out an audit of all government websites to check for accessibility.
►► Draw up a road map for making these websites accessible which clearly outlines
various levels of accessibility to be achieved over various phases.

►► Clearly identify the national standard for web accessibility.
	 http://www.medicare.gov/

17

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

13

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

►► Articulate the need to adhere to the identified national standard or code for
accessibility through a policy document.

►► Identify a body to oversee the implementation these steps.
►► Train web developers of government websites in web accessibility and follow up

with a second training course after a couple of months within which time the
web developers should have made changes to their websites to make them more
accessible.

►► Monitor web accessibility on a regular basis.

Funding Mechanisms including Universal Service Funds (USFs)
Common funding mechanisms for accessible and supportive ICTs include the following:

►► The ministry or department responsible for the implementation of the national
disability policy should itself have a budget from which it can disburse funds
to persons with disabilities or their organizations for various activities such
as purchase of assistive technologies, education programmes, rehabilitation,
accessible content creation, training or research.

►► Budget for each ministry or department to carry out accessibility initiatives such

as making their websites accessible including training their web developers and
conducting an accessibility project connected with the responsibility of that
ministry or department (such as converting text books into accessible formats
under the Ministry for Education).

►► A dedicated national fund in support of workplace accommodation financed

by taxes paid by employers who do not meet minimum employment quotas of
persons with disabilities. France for instance has a 6% minimum quota and its
national disability fund has grown substantially over the years.

►► National lottery. Spain has a national lottery, the profits of which go to the

ONCE Foundation which funds organizations of persons with disabilities and
accessibility programmes.

►► Universal service funds for telecommunications exist in almost every country

to fulfil universal service obligations.18 For many years USFs have focused on
promoting connectivity to rural and unconnected populations. These funds are
usually very large. Over the past few years an increasing number of countries have
expanded their definition of Universal Service to explicitly cover accessibility for
persons with disabilities to the information society through telecommunications
and broadband. There are several countries which have made strides in this area
and have either incorporated this in the policy mandate itself, or have made use
of the fund by just directly funding projects. Some of the ways in which they
are being used in different countries include purchasing assistive technologies,
connecting schools, setting up resource centres in educational institutions,
subsidising the cost of broadband and fixed telephony for families with persons
with disabilities, providing library services to the blind, and a number of other
projects.

18	 A definition of universal service is given in a paper brought out by the ITU in 1998 which states “universal service
is the long-term objective of making communication facilities available to every member of society on an
individual or household basis, and it is used in particular in the regulatory legislative framework to indicate the
obligation of telecommunication operators to provide their services to the entire population.” Elements and
principles of the Information Society, www.itu.int/osg/wsis-themese/access/.../IS%20Principles.doc

14

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

►► Other sources of funding include independent donor agencies which are among
the leading supporters of accessibility/disability-related initiatives. The United
Nations Voluntary Fund on Disability supports the activities of disabled persons’
organizations in developing countries.19 Bilateral aid agencies such as USAID
which have funds earmarked for programmes in support of disability can cover
accessibility projects.

►► Corporate social responsibility initiatives are also a good source for funding ICT

accessibility. CSR programmes also help in raising awareness and capacity in the
private sector on the opportunity to incorporate accessibility within their own
organizations and workplaces.

While many creative opportunities to fund accessibility exist, resource mobilization,
when not directly related to programmes, can backfire. Indeed, it is not uncommon for a
percentage of national funds which are earmarked for disability by a ministry, department
or national dedicated fund to go unutilized for many years. It is therefore essential to
ensure that resource mobilization be designed with specific objectives and resource
allocation processes.

2.E	 Promoting ICT Accessibility with DPOs
In developing countries the reality is quite often that more of the work of promoting the
independent living needs of persons with disabilities and finding practical solutions to
cater to their requirements within a limited resource environment is done by Disabled
Persons Organizations (DPOs). Hence government agencies should seriously consider
supporting and promoting the work of DPOs and NGOs as a primary strategy for
addressing accessibility. This will help achieve immediate results since there is already a
direct connection with the beneficiaries and a minimum resource infrastructure in place
with knowledge and trained manpower to cater to relevant needs. For instance, allocating
a portion of the national budget to enable blindness organizations to undertake
conversion of books into accessible formats would go a long way towards ensuring
that books become available to persons with print disabilities in a timely manner and in
relevant formats. DPOs are often able to find innovative and frugal solutions to addressing
specific challenges, such as providing portable screen readers or other supportive
software which can be carried around and used on multiple computers by persons
with disabilities who are otherwise forced to use cyber-cafes or service centres. Mobile
phones have proved to be the ultimate technology to connect the disabled since they
have features and services which cater for persons with any disability and can be used to
read, write, connect to the Internet, talk and navigate independently. The only challenge
remains to ensure that text-to-speech technology and content has to be created in
local languages and this is something which has to be done by each country in its own
in partnership with DPOs and the private sector. Only investment in local technologies
can reduce costs and create indigenous capacity to serve long-term needs. Also, once
certain basic infrastructure such as local language voices is in place, it will address needs
across a wide range of technologies and uses and will not have to be redone. Developing
countries should consider piggy-backing on existing international open-source
technologies such as Non Visual Desktop Access (NVDA) screen readers and e-speak
text-to-speech software for customisation and deployment. Also, negotiating with service
	 General information on the fund can be found at: http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=8&pid=29

19

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

15

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

providers to lower costs of technology in return for a larger sale volume has successfully
brought down the cost of technology in many countries.
Hence there are many ways in which governments need to intervene and work to
implement ICT accessibility, both through policy and government processes, as well
as through other channels. However, the most important lesson from observing global
practices and trends is that all successful initiatives have been through a partnership
between Government, DPOs and the private sector to create a truly inclusive world.

16

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

3.	 SUMMARY & KEY LEARNING POINTS
The present Module highlights the important opportunities offered by ICTs to foster the
social inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of society and development.
It details the relevant provisions of the CRPD, which require States Parties to promote
ICT usage for persons with disabilities, ICT accessibility and the adoption of assistive
technologies.
The Module reviews the barriers that can prevent persons with disabilities from accessing
and using ICTs, and offers guidance on how to design policies and measures to make ICTs
inclusive for persons with disabilities, including concrete examples and tools for successful
implementation.

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

17

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

4.	 USEFUL RESOURCES
		 United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, available at:
http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=12&pid=150
		 Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind,
Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled available at:
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/marrakesh/
		 Secretariat for the Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities at:
www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable
		 Universal Service for Persons with Disabilities: A Global Survey of Policy Interventions
and Good Practices, by G3ict-CIS, available at: http://g3ict.org/resource_center/
publications_and_reports/p/productCategory_whitepapers/subCat_0/id_193
Accessibility resources
		 e-Accessibility Toolkit for policy makers, by ITU-G3ict, available at:
www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org
		 Making Mobile Phones and Services Accessible for Persons with Disabilities, report by
ITU-G3ict, available at:
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/sis/PwDs/Documents/Mobile_Report.pdf
		 Making Television Accessible Report, by ITU- G3ict, available at:
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/sis/PwDs/Documents/ITU-G3ict%20Making_TV_
Accessible_Report_November_2011.pdf
		 UN Enable- Frequently Asked Questions available at:
http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=23&pid=151#sqc10
		 UNESCO global report: opening new avenues for empowerment: ICTs to access
information and knowledge for persons with disabilities, available at:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/
publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/unesco-globalreport-opening-new-avenues-for-empowerment-icts-to-access-information-andknowledge-for-persons-with-disabilities/
		 UNESCO ItrainOnline website provides accessible web design training and tools at:
http://www.itrainonline.org/itrainonline/english/usability.shtml#Web%20Site%20
Usability%20and%20Accessibility%20-%20Accessibility
		 Ireland’s ICT procurement toolkit, available at:
http://www.universaldesign.ie/useandapply/ict/itprocurementtoolkit
		 EU, 112-the Single European Emergency Number, General Fact Sheet 44 available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/doc/factsheets/044-112-blue-en.pdf

18

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Standards and Guidelines
		 W3C Web Accessibility Initiative available at http://www.w3.org/WAI/
		 Webaim, web accessibility initiative, available at: http://www.webaim.org
		 Website of the DAISY Consortium available at: http://www.daisy.org/about-us
		 Daisy and Emergency preparedness, available at: http://www.daisy.org/daisypedia/
daisy-and-emergency-preparedness
		 Section 508: “Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards”, available
at: http://www.access-board.gov/sec508/standards.htm
Accessibility Projects
		 Daisy Lanka Foundation: Talking Textbooks for Blind Students:
http://www.daisy.org/member/226/DAISY%20Lanka%20Foundation
		 R-Cast: In-Class Use of Mobile Phones for Children with Disabilities in Japan:
http://edict2010.in/files/2010/09/mobile-phone-and-sped-2010-web-version.pdf
		 Jamaica Universal Access fund donates equipment to the deaf:
http://jis.gov.jm/universal-access-fund-donates-ict-equipment-to-the-deaf/
		 Universal Access fund in Pakistan launches project for enabling persons with
disabilities: http://www.usf.org.pk/newsdescription.aspx?44

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

19

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

4.B.	 Appendix A:
Specific Applications and Services for Various Types
of Disabilities and Situations
Vision: Accessibility features such as font and high contrast colour options and screen
readers came with operating systems such as Windows, Linux and Apple iOS. There
are also several third-party software options, both proprietary and open-source, such
as screen readers like Jaws, NVDA or Windows Eyes for personal computers, Talks and
mobile speak for mobile phones, Zoom text (magnifier), and the e-Speak text-to-speech
synthesizer. An example of an innovative App is the LookTel Money Reader which
recognizes currency and speaks aloud the denomination enabling persons with visual
impairment to check the value of bank notes and use money quickly. Borrowing and
reading digital books on computers, mobile phones and e-book readers such as Daisy
readers and the Kindle are very popular with persons with vision impairment. There are
digital libraries such as the Open Library20 or Bookshare.org which have books in Daisy
format for persons with print disabilities.
Physical and motor difficulties: There exist both hardware solutions such as mouth
sticks21, head wands22 and sip-and-puff switches23, as well as software to adjust the way
that the keyboard or mouse alternative responds to input.24 Open source solutions such
as Dasher and FXC software allow users to customize their operating system and use
solutions such as touchscreens, switches, voice recognition and on-screen keyboards,
among others.25 There are also several Apps which support the specific needs of persons
with physical disabilities; for instance Wheelcrowd is an application which helps in
searching for wheelchair-accessible places such as restaurants and other facilities around
a neighbourhood. Wheelmate26 is a free App which provides wheelchair users with an
overview of the closest wheelchair-friendly toilets and parking places. While those have
emerged in countries where smart phones were available, the fast expansion of the
African mobile market and expected continued decrease of the cost of handsets suggests
that similar services are likely to appear.
Hearing or speech impairment: There are several hardware and software technology
options such as hearing aid couplers, text teletypewriter, voice recognition, sign language,
captioning and relay service which are extremely helpful for users with hearing loss. The
mobile phone also provides the possibility of facilities such as text and multimedia and
video sign language messaging, and Apps such as Trippo Voice Magix27 which translates
keyed-in messages into 30 languages and displays the translated text or speaks out the
translated sentence. This can also be directly emailed or posted online as required and is
optimized for both the iPhone and Android. MobileSign28 is a British sign language lexicon
that provides information on more than 4,000 signs and is available on both Google Play
and Apple Store.
	

http://openlibrary.org
	 A hard stick held in the mouth by the user and used to type on the keyboard.
22
	 A stick that is strapped to the head of the user who moves his head to operate the keyboard.
23
	 This device uses the breath of the user as on and off signals and uses the information to control various actions
from operating a wheelchair to navigating a computer.
24
	 http://www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org/toolkit/promoting_assistive_technologies/solutions
25
	 http://abilitynet.wetpaint.com/
26
	 Available at: http://lifecenter.ric.org/index.php?tray=content&tid=top2&cid=6769
27
	 Available at: http://www.christopherreeve.org/site/c.mtKZKgMWKwG/b.6133757/k.38B9/2010Travel.htm
28
	 Read more at http://www.mobilesign.org/
1

21

20

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Reading and Communication: Standalone devices are available for people with reading
and communication difficulties for e.g. Voice Output Communication Aids (VOCA) (for
speech difficulties), eBook readers (for reading difficulties) and spelling aids for people
with reading difficulties such as dyslexia. Tools such as RapidSet and Washer enable users
to change the text styles to make reading easier. Certain other software packages such
as VuBar, RedPlease, and Bookreader add extra tools to the system to support reading.
In addition there are many commercial and proprietary technologies that enhance the
computer with special features. Examples of such hardware tools include Daisy readers
and Kurzweil machines and examples of software tools are Dragon Naturally Speaking
and TexthelpRead. A Special Phone1 is an App which makes it easy for persons with
disabilities to make emergency calls. The person just needs to key in the number on the
magnified keypad in the App and shake the phone to make the call. For speed dialling,
users can store up to six emergency numbers that can be called by shaking – once
for contact one, twice for contact two and so on. The app can also recognize voice
commands in different languages and dialects even in surroundings where there is a lot
of background noise.
Examples of ICT Applications and Services for Persons with Disabilities
(including demos)
Visit and discussion of Bookshare.org (www.bookshare.org)
Demo of money reader on iPhone or Android [for example,
http://www.looktel.com/moneyreader]
Demo of information service for persons with physical disabilities.
Visiting participants’ websites with a screen reader or using accessibility checkers to check
participants websites.

	

1

http://www.christopherreeve.org/site/c.mtKZKgMWKwG/b.6133647/k.284D

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

21

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

5.	 LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 1
Technical Content 2.A.: Background
	

Learning Activity 2.A.: The Importance of ICTs

Technical Content 2.B.: Legal Framework
	

Learning Activity 2.B.: Member States’ Obligations on the Provision of ICT

	

Handout: CRPD Article 2 - Definitions

	

Handout: CRPD Article 9 – Accessibility

	

Handout: CRPD Article 21 – Freedom of Expression and Opinion, and Access to
Information

Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 2
Technical Content 2.C: Making ICT Inclusive for Persons with Disabilities

22

	

Learning Activity 2.C.: Fostering Social Inclusion

	

Video: The World Bank, ICT Facilitates Social Inclusion:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z0weChJT6uo

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 1
Key Messages See the summary and key learning points.

Objectives

By the end of this session, participants will have:
- reflected on what information and communication
technologies (ICTs) are, and how they contribute to the
inclusion of persons with disabilities;
- considered Member States’ responsibilities for the provision
of ICT for persons with disabilities.

Room
Set up for plenary discussion and cabaret style for small group
Arrangement work.

Activity

10 mins – Presentation: What do we mean by ICTs?
30 mins – Group work & plenary discussion LA 2.A.
20 mins – Presentation: Introduction to Articles 9 and 2
20 mins – Group work around LA 2.B.
10 mins – Summary and wrap-up

Duration

90 minutes

Notes for
a Training
Team

This session is organized around two Learning Activities as
outlined in the activity.
For LA 2A – divide the participants into groups, and have them
focus on one of the three issues on the task sheet. During
feedback and discussion, be sure to fill in any learning gaps.
For La 2B – you can use the handouts (Articles 2 and 9)
as support for your input. You can also use Article 21 for
additional support.

Task Sheets

Learning Activity 2.A.: The Importance of ICTs
Learning Activity 2.B.: Member States’ Obligations on the
Provision of ICT

Handouts

Handout: CRPD Article 2 - Definitions
Handout: CRPD Article 9 – Accessibility
Handout: CRPD Article 21 – Freedom of Expression and
Opinion, and Access to Information

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

23

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Learning Activity 2.A: The Importance of ICTs
Objective: To reflect on what information and communication technologies (ICTs)
are, and how they contribute to the inclusion of persons with disabilities.
ICTs have crucial importance for the inclusion of persons with disabilities and for addressing the barriers that may limit their participation in society.
Task
In your group, you will focus on ONE of the following issues:
1.	 Discuss and record 3 important examples of ICT usage that are most important
for persons with disabilities in the context of your country in both urban and rural
environments.
2.	 Give 3 examples of possible exclusion from essential services if ICTs are not made
accessible.
3.	 Give three examples of ICT innovations providing new enabling solutions to
persons with disabilities for work, education or leisure.
Discuss the issue and prepare a flipchart presentation of your three examples.

You have 15 minutes to work together in your groups. Your presentation to plenary
should last no longer than 5 minutes.

24

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Learning Activity 2.B: Member States’ Obligations on the Provision of ICT
Objective: To consider Member States’ responsibilities for the provision of ICT for
persons with disabilities.
In your group look at the table and provide examples from your own experiences. Notice
where there are gaps and speculate if the gaps relate to your lack of knowledge or the
government’s inactivity on the provision.
Task
Provision

Examples

Ensure that persons with disabilities have
equal access to the physical environment,
transportation, information and
communications, including information and
communications technologies and systems
(Article 9)
Promote the research, development and
availability of new technologies suitable for
persons with disabilities, at affordable cost
that will facilitate living and inclusion within
the community; this includes ICTs, mobility
aids, devices and assistive technologies.
(Article 4 (G)
Provide all information and communication
in accessible formats, including cultural
materials and television (Article 30)
Promote accessibility of education which
include modes of communications, assistive
technology etc. (Article 24)
Ensure the right to work and employment on
an equal basis with others, providing a just
favourable and equitable work environment
(Article 27)
Make international cooperation accessible
to persons with disabilities and promote
the sharing of accessible and assistive
technologies. (Article 32)

You have 20 minutes to complete this activity. There will not be a formal feedback of each
discussion, but be ready to share your thoughts in the discussion.
Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

25

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Handout: CRPD Article 2: Definitions
For the purposes of the present Convention:
"Communication" includes languages, display of text, Braille, tactile communication,
large print, and accessible multimedia along with written, audio, plain-language, humanreader and augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats of communication,
including accessible information and communications technology.
"Language" includes spoken and signed languages and other forms of non-spoken
languages.
"Discrimination on grounds of disability" means any distinction, exclusion or
restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose or effect of impairing or
nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil
or any other field. It includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable
accommodation.
"Reasonable accommodation" means necessary and appropriate modification and
adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a
particular case, to ensure for persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an
equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
"Universal design" means the design of products, environments, programmes and
services to be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without the need for
adaptation or specialized design. "Universal design" shall not exclude supportive devices
for particular groups of persons with disabilities where this is needed.

26

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Handout: CRPD Article 9: Accessibility
1.	 To enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate fully
in all aspects of life, State parties shall take appropriate measures to ensure for
persons with disabilities access, on an equal basis with others, to the physical
environment, to transportation, to information and communications, including
information and communications technologies and systems, and to other
facilities and services open or provided to the public, in both urban and rural
areas. These measures, which shall include identification and elimination of
obstacles and barriers to accessibility, shall apply to, inter alia:
(a)	 Buildings, roads, transportation and other indoor and outdoor facilities,
including schools, housing, medical facilities and workplaces.
(b)	 Information, communications and other services, including electronic
services and emergency services.
2. State parties shall also take appropriate measures to:
(a)	 develop, promulgate and monitor the implementation of minimum
standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and services open
or provided to the public;
(b)	 ensure that private entities that offer facilities and services which are open
or provided to the public take into account all aspects of accessibility for
persons with disabilities;
(c)	 provide training for stakeholders on accessibility issues facing persons with
disabilities;
(d)	 provide in buildings and other facilities open to the public signage in braille
and in easy to read and understand forms;
(e)	 provide forms of live assistance and intermediaries, including guides, readers
and professional sign language interpreters, to facilitate accessibility to
buildings and other facilities open to the public;
(f )	 promote other appropriate forms of assistance and support to persons with
disabilities to ensure their access to information;
(g)	 promote access for persons with disabilities to new information and
communications technologies and systems, including the internet;
(h)	 promote the design, development, production and distribution of accessible
information and communications technologies and systems at an early
stage, so that these technologies and systems become accessible at
minimum cost.

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

27

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Handout: CRPD Article 21: Freedom of Expression and Opinion, and Access to
Information
State parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities
can exercise the right to freedom of expression and opinion, including the freedom
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas on an equal basis with others and
through all forms of communication of their choice, as defined in Article 2 of the present
Convention, including by:
(a)	 Providing information intended for the general public to persons with disabilities
in accessible formats and technologies appropriate to different kinds of
disabilities in a timely manner and without additional cost.
(b)	 Accepting and facilitating the use in official interactions of sign languages, Braille,
augmentative and alternative communication, and all other accessible means,
modes and formats of communication of their choice by persons with disabilities.
(c)	 Urging private entities that provide services to the general public, including
through the Internet, to provide information and services in accessible and
usable formats for persons with disabilities.
(d)	 Encouraging the mass media, including providers of information through the
Internet, to make their services accessible to persons with disabilities.
(e)	 Recognizing and promoting the use of sign languages.

28

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Session Sheet for the Trainer – ICT and Disability, Session 2
Key Messages See the summary and key learning points.

Objectives

By the end of this session, participants will have:
- described how ICTs can foster the social inclusion of persons
with disabilities in all aspects of life;
- identified approaches to making ICT inclusive for persons
with disabilities.

Room
Video set-up including speakers, projector, computer.
Arrangement Tables for small group work with 4-6 people.
Activity

5 mins – View short video in plenary, with reflections and
discussion.
35 mins – Group work around LA 2.C. – Fostering Social
Inclusion
45 mins – Feedback and summary.

Duration

90 minutes

Notes for
a Training
Team

Use the YouTube video
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z0weChJT6uo) to
introduce ICT and social inclusion. Conclude with some slides
to identify where to get more examples and technical inputs
(see references). If participants have internet access and
computers, suggest they use the following link to support
their research: www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org

Task Sheets

Learning Activity 2.C.: Fostering Social Inclusion

Handouts

N/A

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

29

TOOLKIT ON DISABILITY FOR AFRICA

Learning Activity 2.C.: Fostering Social Inclusion
Objective: To describe how ICTs can foster the social inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of life and to identify approaches for making ICT inclusive for
persons with disabilities.
Step One
Choose 3 items from the list:
►► Healthcare
►► Primary education
►► Secondary education
►► Tertiary, professional and lifelong education
►► Employment
►► Independent living
►► Government services
►► Participation: political & public life
In your group, discuss and describe how ICTs can both:
1.	 Improve ACCESS to services and opportunities, and
2.	 ASSIST in independent living.
Step Two
Staying in your group, identify what would need to happen to ensure that ICTs are utilised
to both facilitate access and assist in independent living. Draw from real examples provided by your group members. (It might help to think about the role of government,
disabled people’s organizations, civil society and the private sector).

You have 20 minutes to complete Part 1 and a further 15 minutes to complete Part 2. Be
ready to present a summary of your discussions. Your presentation should last no longer
than 5 minutes.

30

Module 12 - INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) AND DISABILITY

