INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Human-Computer Interaction: Overview on State of the Art
Fakhreddine Karray, Milad Alemzadeh, Jamil Abou Saleh and Mo Nours Arab
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence Lab., Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
karray@uwaterloo.ca, malemzad@uwaterloo.ca, jaabousa@uwaterloo.ca,
mnarab@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract
The intention of this paper is to provide an overview on the subject of Human-Computer
Interaction. The overview includes the basic definitions and terminology, a survey of existing
technologies and recent advances in the field, common architectures used in the design of HCI
systems which includes unimodal and multimodal configurations, and finally the applications
of HCI. This paper also offers a comprehensive number of references for each concept,
method, and application in the HCI.
Keywords: Human-Computer Interaction, Multimodal HCI, Ubiquitous Computing

1

Introduction

Utilizing computers had always begged the question of interfacing. The methods by which
human has been interacting with computers has travelled a long way. The journey still
continues and new designs of technologies and systems appear more and more every day and
the research in this area has been growing very fast in the last few decades.
The growth in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) field has not only been in quality of
interaction, it has also experienced different branching in its history. Instead of designing
regular interfaces, the different research branches have had different focus on the concepts of
multimodality rather than unimodality, intelligent adaptive interfaces rather than
command/action based ones, and finally active rather than passive interfaces.
This paper intends to provide an overview on the state of the art of HCI systems and cover
most important branches as mentioned above. In the next section, basic definitions and
terminology of HCI are given. Then an overview of existing technologies and also recent
advances in the field is provided. This is followed up by a description on the different
architectures of HCI designs. The final sections pertain to description on some of the
applications of HCI and future directions in the field.

137

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

2

Human-Computer Interaction: Definition, Terminology

Sometimes called as Man-Machine Interaction or Interfacing, concept of Human-Computer
Interaction/Interfacing (HCI) was automatically represented with the emerging of computer,
or more generally machine, itself. The reason, in fact, is clear: most sophisticated machines
are worthless unless they can be used properly by men. This basic argument simply presents
the main terms that should be considered in the design of HCI: functionality and usability [1].
Why a system is actually designed can ultimately be defined by what the system can do i.e.
how the functions of a system can help towards the achievement of the purpose of the system.
Functionality of a system is defined by the set of actions or services that it provides to its
users. However, the value of functionality is visible only when it becomes possible to be
efficiently utilised by the user [2]. Usability of a system with a certain functionality is the
range and degree by which the system can be used efficiently and adequately to accomplish
certain goals for certain users. The actual effectiveness of a system is achieved when there is a
proper balance between the functionality and usability of a system [3].
Having these concepts in mind and considering that the terms computer, machine and system
are often used interchangeably in this context, HCI is a design that should produce a fit
between the user, the machine and the required services in order to achieve a certain
performance both in quality and optimality of the services [4]. Determining what makes a
certain HCI design good is mostly subjective and context dependant. For example, an aircraft
part designing tool should provide high precisions in view and design of the parts while a
graphics editing software may not need such a precision. The available technology could also
affect how different types of HCI are designed for the same purpose. One example is using
commands, menus, graphical user interfaces (GUI), or virtual reality to access functionalities
of any given computer. In the next section, a more detailed overview of existing methods and
devices used to interact with computers and the recent advances in the field is presented.
3

Overview on HCI

The advances made in last decade in HCI have almost made it impossible to realize which
concept is fiction and which is and can be real. The thrust in research and the constant twists
in marketing cause the new technology to become available to everyone in no time. However,
not all existing technologies are accessible and/or affordable by public. In the first part of this
section, an overview of the technology that more or less is available to and used by public is

138

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

presented. In the second part, an outlook of the direction to which HCI research is heading has
been drawn.
3.1 Existing HCI Technologies
HCI design should consider many aspects of human behaviours and needs to be useful. The
complexity of the degree of the involvement of a human in interaction with a machine is
sometimes invisible compared to the simplicity of the interaction method itself. The existing
interfaces differ in the degree of complexity both because of degree of functionality/usability
and the financial and economical aspect of the machine in market. For instance, an electrical
kettle need not to be sophisticated in interface since its only functionality is to heat the water
and it would not be cost-effective to have an interface more than a thermostatic on and off
switch. On the other hand, a simple website that may be limited in functionality should be
complex enough in usability to attract and keep customers [1].
Therefore, in design of HCI, the degree of activity that involves a user with a machine should
be thoroughly thought. The user activity has three different levels: physical [5], cognitive [6],
and affective [7]. The physical aspect determines the mechanics of interaction between human
and computer while the cognitive aspect deals with ways that users can understand the system
and interact with it. The affective aspect is a more recent issue and it tries not only to make
the interaction a pleasurable experience for the user but also to affect the user in a way that
make user continue to use the machine by changing attitudes and emotions toward the user
[1].
The focus of this paper is mostly on the advances in physical aspect of interaction and to
show how different methods of interaction can be combined (Multi-Modal Interaction) and
how each method can be improved in performance (Intelligent Interaction) to provide a better
and easier interface for the user. The existing physical technologies for HCI basically can be
categorized by the relative human sense that the device is designed for. These devices are
basically relying on three human senses: vision, audition, and touch [1].
Input devices that rely on vision are the most used kind and are commonly either switch-based
or pointing devices [8] [9]. The switch-based devices are any kind of interface that uses
buttons and switches like a keyboard [10]. The pointing devices examples are mice, joysticks,
touch screen panels, graphic tablets, trackballs, and pen-based input [11]. Joysticks are the
ones that have both switches and pointing abilities. The output devices can be any kind of
visual display or printing device [3].

139

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

The devices that rely on audition are more advance devices that usually need some kind of
speech recognition [12]. These devices aim to facilitate the interaction as much as possible
and therefore, are much more difficult to build [13]. Output auditory devices are however
easier to create. Nowadays, all kind of non-speech [14] and speech signals and messages are
produced by machines as output signals. Beeps, alarms, and turn-by-turn navigation
commands of a GPS device are simple examples.
The most difficult and costly devices to build are haptic devices [15]. “These kinds of
interfaces generate sensations to the skin and muscles through touch, weight and relative
rigidity [1].” Haptic devices [16] are generally made for virtual reality [17] or disability
assistive applications [18].
The recent methods and technologies in HCI are now trying to combine former methods of
interaction together and with other advancing technologies such as networking and animation.
These new advances can be categorized in three sections: wearable devices [19], wireless
devices [20], and virtual devices [21]. The technology is improving so fast that even the
borders between these new technologies are fading away and they are getting mixed together.
Few examples of these devices are: GPS navigation systems [22], military super-soldier
enhancing devices (e.g. thermal vision [23], tracking other soldier movements using GPS, and
environmental scanning), radio frequency identification (RFID) products, personal digital
assistants (PDA), and virtual tour for real estate business [24]. Some of these new devices
upgraded and integrated previous methods of interaction. As an illustration in case, there is
the solution to keyboarding that has been offered by Compaq’s iPAQ which is called Canesta
keyboard as shown in figure 1. This is a virtual keyboard that is made by projecting a
QWERTY like pattern on a solid surface using a red light. Then device tries to track user’s
finger movement while typing on the surface with a motion sensor and send the keystrokes
back to the device [25].

Figure 1: Canesta virtual keyboard [26]

140

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

3.2 Recent Advances in HCI
In following sections, recent directions and advances of research in HCI, namely intelligent
and adaptive interfaces and ubiquitous computing, are presented. These interfaces involve
different levels of user activity: physical, cognitive, and affection.
3.2.1 Intelligent and Adaptive HCI
Although the devices used by majority of public are still some kind of plain command/action
setups using not very sophisticated physical apparatus, the flow of research is directed to
design of intelligent and adaptive interfaces. The exact theoretical definition of the concept of
intelligence or being smart is not known or at least not publicly agreeable. However, one can
define these concepts by the apparent growth and improvement in functionality and usability
of new devices in market.
As mentioned before, it is economically and technologically crucial to make HCI designs that
provide easier, more pleasurable and satisfying experience for the users. To realize this goal,
the interfaces are getting more natural to use every day. Evolution of interfaces in note-taking
tools is a good example. First there were typewriters, then keyboards and now touch screen
tablet PCs that you can write on using your own handwriting and they recognize it change it
to text [27] and if not already made, tools that transcript whatever you say automatically so
you do not need to write at all.
One important factor in new generation of interfaces is to differentiate between using
intelligence in the making of the interface (Intelligent HCI) [28] or in the way that the
interface interacts with users (Adaptive HCI) [29]. Intelligent HCI designs are interfaces that
incorporate at least some kind of intelligence in perception from and/or response to users. A
few examples are speech enabled interfaces [30] that use natural language to interact with
user and devices that visually track user’s movements [31] or gaze [32] and respond
accordingly.
Adaptive HCI designs, on the other hand, may not use intelligence in the creation of interface
but use it in the way they continue to interact with users [33]. An adaptive HCI might be a
website using regular GUI for selling various products. This website would be adaptive -to
some extent- if it has the ability to recognize the user and keeps a memory of his searches and
purchases and intelligently search, find, and suggest products on sale that it thinks user might
need. Most of these kinds of adaptation are the ones that deal with cognitive and affective
levels of user activity [1].
141

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

Another example that uses both intelligent and adaptive interface is a PDA or a tablet PC that
has the handwriting recognition ability and it can adapt to the handwriting of the logged in
user so to improve its performance by remembering the corrections that the user made to the
recognised text.
Finally, another factor to be considered about intelligent interfaces is that most non-intelligent
HCI design are passive in nature i.e. they only respond whenever invoked by user while
ultimate intelligent and adaptive interfaces tend to be active interfaces. The example is smart
billboards or advertisements that present themselves according to users’ taste [34] [35]. In the
next section, combination of different methods of HCI and how it could help towards making
intelligent adaptive natural interfaces is discussed.
3.2.2 Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence
The latest research in HCI field is unmistakably ubiquitous computing (Ubicomp). The term
which often used interchangeably by ambient intelligence and pervasive computing, refers to
the ultimate methods of human-computer interaction that is the deletion of a desktop and
embedding of the computer in the environment so that it becomes invisible to humans while
surrounding them everywhere hence the term ambient.
The idea of ubiquitous computing was first introduced by Mark Weiser during his tenure as
chief technologist at Computer Science Lab in Xerox PARC in 1998. His idea was to embed
computers everywhere in the environment and everyday objects so that people could interact
with many computers at the same time while they are invisible to them and wirelessly
communicating with each other [27].
Ubicomp has also been named the Third Wave of computing. The First Wave was the
mainframe era, many people one computer. Then it was the Second Wave, one person one
computer which was called PC era and now Ubicomp introduces many computers one person
era [27]. Figure 2 shows the major trends in computing.

142

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Figure 2: Major trends in computing [27]
4

HCI Systems Architecture

Most important factor of a HCI design is its configuration. In fact, any given interface is
generally defined by the number and diversity of inputs and outputs it provides. Architecture
of a HCI system shows what these inputs and outputs are and how they work together.
Following sections explain different configurations and designs upon which an interface is
based.
4.1 Unimodal HCI Systems
As mentioned earlier, an interface mainly relies on number and diversity of its inputs and
outputs which are communication channels that enable users to interact with computer via this
interface. Each of the different independent single channels is called a modality [36]. A
system that is based on only one modality is called unimodal. Based on the nature of different
modalities, they can be divided into three categories:
1. Visual-Based
2. Audio-Based
3. Sensor-Based
The next sub-sections describe each category and provide examples and references to each
modality.
4.1.1

Visual-Based HCI

The visual based human computer interaction is probably the most widespread area in HCI
research. Considering the extent of applications and variety of open problems and approaches,

143

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

researchers tried to tackle different aspects of human responses which can be recognized as a
visual signal. Some of the main research areas in this section are as follow:
•

Facial Expression Analysis

•

Body Movement Tracking (Large-scale)

•

Gesture Recognition

•

Gaze Detection (Eyes Movement Tracking)

While the goal of each area differs due to applications, a general conception of each area can
be concluded. Facial expression analysis generally deals with recognition of emotions visually
[37] [38] [39]. Body movement tracking [31] [40] and gesture recognition [41] [42] [43] are
usually the main focus of this area and can have different purposes but they are mostly used
for direct interaction of human and computer in a command and action scenario. Gaze
detection [32] is mostly an indirect form of interaction between user and machine which is
mostly used for better understanding of user’s attention, intent or focus in context-sensitive
situations [44]. The exception is eye tracking systems for helping disabilities in which eye
tracking plays a main role in command and action scenario, e.g. pointer movement, blinking
for clicking [45]. It is notable that some researchers tried to assist or even replace other types
of interactions (audio-, sensor-based) with visual approaches. For example, lip reading or lip
movement tracking is known to be used as an influential aid for speech recognition error
correction [46].
4.1.2 Audio-Based HCI
The audio based interaction between a computer and a human is another important area of
HCI systems. This area deals with information acquired by different audio signals. While the
nature of audio signals may not be as variable as visual signals but the information gathered
from audio signals can be more trustable, helpful, and is some cases unique providers of
information. Research areas in this section can be divided to the following parts:
•

Speech Recognition

•

Speaker Recognition

•

Auditory Emotion Analysis

•

Human-Made Noise/Sign Detections (Gasp, Sigh, Laugh, Cry, etc.)

•

Musical Interaction
144

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Historically, speech recognition [12] and speaker recognition [47] have been the main focus
of researchers. Recent endeavors to integrate human emotions in intelligent human computer
interaction initiated the efforts in analysis of emotions in audio signals [48] [49]. Other than
the tone and pitch of speech data, typical human auditory signs such as sigh, gasp, and etc
helped emotion analysis for designing more intelligent HCI system [50]. Music generation
and interaction is a very new area in HCI with applications in art industry which is studied in
both audio- and visual-based HCI systems [51].
4.1.3 Sensor-Based HCI
This section is a combination of variety of areas with a wide range of applications. The
commonality of these different areas is that at least one physical sensor is used between user
and machine to provide the interaction. These sensors as shown below can be very primitive
or very sophisticated.
1. Pen-Based Interaction
2. Mouse & Keyboard
3. Joysticks
4. Motion Tracking Sensors and Digitizers
5. Haptic Sensors
6. Pressure Sensors
7. Taste/Smell Sensors
Some of these sensors have been around for a while and some of them are very new
technologies. Pen-Based sensors are specifically of interest in mobile devices and are related
to pen gesture [30] and handwriting recognition areas. Keyboards, mice and joysticks are
already discussed in section 3.1. For more information consult references: [8] [9] [10] [11].
Motion tracking sensors/digitizers are state-of-the-art technology which revolutionized movie,
animation, art, and video-game industry. They come in the form of wearable cloth or joint
sensors and made computers much more able to interact with reality and human able to create
their world virtually. Figure 3 depicts such a device. Haptic and pressure sensors are of
special interest for applications in robotics and virtual reality [15] [16] [18]. New humanoid
robots include hundreds of haptic sensors that make the robots sensitive and aware to touch
[52] [53]. These types of sensors are also used in medical surgery application [54]. A few

145

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

research works are also done on area of taste and smell sensors [55]; however they are not as
popular as other areas.

Figure 3: Wearable motion capture cloth for making of video games (Taken from Operation
Sports)
4.2 Multimodal HCI Systems
The term multimodal refers to combination of multiple modalities. In MMHCI systems, these
modalities mostly refer to the ways that the system responds to the inputs, i.e. communication
channels [36]. The definition of these channels is inherited from human types of
communication which are basically his senses: Sight, Hearing, Touch, Smell, and Taste. The
possibilities for interaction with a machine include but are not limited to these types.
Therefore, a multimodal interface acts as a facilitator of human-computer interaction via two
or more modes of input that go beyond the traditional keyboard and mouse. The exact number
of supported input modes, their types and the way in which they work together may vary
widely from one multimodal system to another. Multimodal interfaces incorporate different
combinations of speech, gesture, gaze, facial expressions and other non-conventional modes
of input. One of the most commonly supported combinations of input methods is that of
gesture and speech [56].
Although an ideal multimodal HCI system should contain a combination of single modalities
that interact correlatively, the practical boundaries and open problems in each modality
oppose limitations on the fusion of different modalities. In spite of all progress made in
MMHCI, in most of existing multimodal systems, the modalities are still treated separately
and only at the end, results of different modalities are combined together.

146

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

The reason is that the open problems in each area are yet to be perfected meaning that there is
still work to be done to acquire a reliable tool for each sub-area. Moreover, roles of different
modalities and their share in interplay are not scientifically known. “Yet, people convey
multimodal communicative signals in a complementary and redundant manner. Therefore, in
order to accomplish a human-like multimodal analysis of multiple input signals acquired by
different sensors, the signals cannot be considered mutually independently and cannot be
combined in a context-free manner at the end of the intended analysis but, on the contrary, the
input data should be processed in a joint feature space and according to a context-dependent
model. In practice, however, besides the problems of context sensing and developing contextdependent models for combining multisensory information, one should cope with the size of
the required joint feature space. Problems include large dimensionality, differing feature
formats, and time-alignment [36].”
An interesting aspect of multimodality is the collaboration of different modalities to assist the
recognitions. For example, lip movement tracking (visual-based) can help speech recognition
methods (audio-based) and speech recognition methods (audio-based) can assist command
acquisition in gesture recognition (visual-based). The next section shows some of application
of intelligent multimodal systems.
5

Applications

A classic example of a multimodal system is the “Put That There” demonstration system [57].
This system allowed one to move an object into a new location on a map on the screen by
saying “put that there” while pointing to the object itself then pointing to the desired
destination. Multimodal interfaces have been used in a number of applications including mapbased simulations, such as the aforementioned system; information kiosks, such as AT&T’s
MATCHKiosk [58] and biometric authentication systems [56].
Multimodal interfaces can offer a number of advantages over traditional interfaces. For one
thing, they can offer a more natural and user-friendly experience. For instance, in a real-estate
system called Real Hunter [24], one can point with a finger to a house of interest and speak to
make queries about that particular house. Using a pointing gesture to select an object and
using speech to make queries about it illustrates the type of natural experience multimodal
interfaces offer to their users. Another key strength of multimodal interfaces is their ability to
provide redundancy to accommodate different people and different circumstances. For
instance, MATCHKiosk [58] allows one to use speech or handwriting to specify the type of

147

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

business to search for on a map. Thus, in a noisy setting, one may provide input through
handwriting rather than speech. Few other examples of applications of multimodal systems
are listed below:
•

Smart Video Conferencing [59]

•

Intelligent Homes/Offices [60]

•

Driver Monitoring [61]

•

Intelligent Games [62]

•

E-Commerce [63]

•

Helping People with Disabilities [64]

In the following sections, some of important applications of multimodal systems have been
presented with greater details.
5.1 Multimodal Systems for Disabled people
One good application of multimodal systems is to address and assist disabled people (as
persons with hands disabilities), which need other kinds of interfaces than ordinary people. In
such systems, disabled users can perform work on the PC by interacting with the machine
using voice and head movements [65]. Figure 4 is an actual example of such a system.

Figure 4: Gaze detection pointing system for people with disabilities (taken from
www.adamfulton.co.uk)
Two modalities are then used: speech and head movements. Both modalities are active
continuously. The head position indicates the coordinates of the cursor in current time
moment on the screen. Speech, on the other hand, provides the needed information about the
meaning of the action that must be performed with an object selected by the cursor.

148

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Synchronization between the two modalities is performed by calculating the cursor position at
the beginning of speech detection. This is mainly due to the fact that during the process of
pronouncing the complete sentence, the cursor location can be moved by moving the head,
and then the cursor can be pointing to other graphical object; moreover the command which
must be fulfilled is appeared in the brain of a human in a short time before beginning of
phrase input. Figure 5 shows the diagram of this system.

Figure 5: Diagram of a bimodal system [65]
In spite of some decreasing of operation speed, the multimodal assertive system allows
working with computer without using standard mouse and keyboard. Hence, such system can
be successfully used for hands-free PC control for users with disabilities of their hands.
5.2 Emotion Recognition Multimodal Systems
As we move towards a world in which computers are more and more ubiquitous, it will
become more essential that machines perceive and interpret all clues, implicit and explicit,
that we may provide them regarding our intentions. A natural human-computer interaction
cannot be based solely on explicitly stated commands. Computers will have to detect the
various behavioural signals based on which to infer one’s emotional state. This is a significant
piece of the puzzle that one has to put together to predict accurately one’s intentions and
future behaviour.
People are able to make prediction about one’s emotional state based on their observations
about one’s face, body, and voice. Studies show that if one had access to only one of these
modalities, the face modality would produce the best predictions. However, this accuracy can

149

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

be improved by 35% when human judges are given access to both face and body modalities
together [66]. This suggests that affect recognition, which has for the most part focused on
facial expressions, can greatly benefit from multimodal fusion techniques.
One of the few works that has attempted to integrate more than one modality for affect
recognition is [67] in which facial features and body posture features are combined to produce
an indicator of one’s frustration. Another work that integrated face and body modalities is
[68] in which the authors showed that, similar to humans, machine classification of emotion is
better when based upon face and body data, rather than either modality alone. In [69], the
authors attempted to fuse facial and voice data for affect recognition. Once again, remaining
consistent with human judges, machine classification of emotion as neutral, sad, angry, or
happy was most accurate when the facial and vocal data is combined.
They recorded the four emotions: “sadness, anger, happiness, and neutral state”. The detailed
facial motions were captured in conjunctions with simultaneous speech recordings. Deducted
experiments showed that the performance of the facial recognition based system overcame the
one based on acoustic information only. Results also show that an appropriate fusion of both
modalities gave measurable improvements.
Results show that the emotion recognition system based on acoustic information only give an
overall performance of 70.9 percent, compared to an overall performance of 85 percent for a
recognition system based on facial expressions. This is, in fact, due to the fact that the cheek
areas give important information for emotion classification.
On the other hand, for the bimodal system based on fusing the facial recognition and acoustic
information, the overall performance of this classifier was 89.1 percent.
5.3 Map-Based Multimodal Applications
Different input modalities are suitable for expressing different messages. For instance, speech
provides an easy and natural mechanism for expressing a query about a selected object or
requesting that the object initiate a given operation. However, speech may not be ideal for
tasks, such as selection of a particular region on the screen or defining out a particular path.
These types of tasks are better accommodated by hand or pen gestures. However, making
queries about a given region and selecting that region are all typical tasks that should be
accommodate by a map-based interface. Thus, the natural conclusion is that map-based
interfaces can greatly improve the user experience by supporting multiple modes of input,
especially speech and gestures.
150

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Quickset [70] is one of the more widely known and older map-based applications that make
use of speech and pen gesture input. Quickset is a military-training application that allows
users to use one of the two modalities or both simultaneously to express a full command. For
instance, users may simply draw out with a pen a predefined symbol for platoons at a given
location on the map to create a new platoon in that location. Alternatively, users could use
speech to specify their intent on creating a new platoon and could specify vocally the coordinates in which to place the platoon. Lastly, users could express vocally their intent on
making a new platoon while making a pointing gesture with a pen to specify the location of
the new platoon.
A more recent multimodal map-based application is Real Hunter [24]. It is a real-estate
interface that expects users to select objects or regions with touch input while making queries
using speech. For instance, the user can ask “How much is this?” while pointing to a house on
the map.
Tour guides are another type of map-based applications that have shown great potential to
benefit from multimodal interfaces. One such example is MATCHKiosk [58], the interactive
city guide. In a similar fashion to Quickset, MATCHKiosk allows one to express certain
queries using speech only, such as “Find me Indian restaurants in Washington.”; using pen
input only by circling a region and writing out “restaurants”; using bimodal input by saying
“Indian restaurants in this area” and drawing out a circle around Alexandria. These examples
illustrate MATCHKiosk’s incorporation of handwriting recognition that can frequently
substitute for speech input. Although speech may be the more natural option for a user, given
the imperfectness of speech, especially in noisy environments, having handwriting as a
backup can reduce user frustration.
5.4 Multimodal Human-Robot Interface Applications
Similar to some map-based interfaces, human-robot interfaces usually have to provide
mechanisms for pointing to particular locations and for expressing operation-initiating
requests. As discussed earlier, the former type of interaction is well accommodated by
gestures, whereas the latter is better accommodate by speech. Thus, the human-robot
interface built by the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) should come as no surprise [71].
NRL’s interface allows users to point to a location while saying “Go over there”.
Additionally, it allows users to use a PDA screen as a third possible avenue of interaction,
which could be resorted to when speech or hand gesture recognition is failing. Another

151

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

multimodal human-robot interface is the one built by Interactive System Laboratories (ISL)
[72], which allows use of speech to request the robot to do something while gestures could be
used to point to objects that are referred to by the speech. One such example is to ask the
robot, “switch on the light” while pointing to the light. Additionally, in ISL’s interface, the
system may ask for clarification from the user when unsure about the input. For instance, in
case that no hand gesture is recognized that is pointing to a light, the system may ask the user:
“Which light?”
5.5 Multi-Modal HCI in Medicine
By the early 1980s, surgeons were beginning to reach their limits based on traditional
methods alone. Human hand was unfeasible for many tasks and greater magnification and
smaller tools were needed. Higher precision was required to localize and manipulate within
small and sensitive parts of the human body. Digital robotic neuro-surgery has come as a
leading solution to these limitations and emerged fast due to the vast improvements in
engineering, computer technology and neuro-imaging techniques. Robotics surgery was
introduced into the surgical area [73].
State University of Aerospace Instrumentation, University of Karlsruhe (Germany) and
Harvard Medical School (USA) has been working on developing man-machine interfaces,
adaptive robots and multi-agent technologies intended for neuro-surgery [54].
The neuro-surgical robot consists of the following main components: An arm, feedback vision
sensors, controllers, a localization system and a data processing centre. Sensors provide the
surgeon with feedbacks from the surgical site with real-time imaging, where the latter one
updates the controller with new instructions for the robot by using the computer interface and
some joysticks.
Neuro-surgical robotics provide the ability to perform surgeries on a much smaller scale with
much higher accuracy and precision, giving access to small corridors which is completely
important when a brain surgery is involved [73].
6

Conclusion

Human-Computer Interaction is an important part of systems design. Quality of system
depends on how it is represented and used by users. Therefore, enormous amount of attention
has been paid to better designs of HCI. The new direction of research is to replace common
regular methods of interaction with intelligent, adaptive, multimodal, natural methods.

152

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

Ambient intelligence or ubiquitous computing which is called the Third Wave is trying to
embed the technology into the environment so to make it more natural and invisible at the
same time. Virtual reality is also an advancing field of HCI which can be the common
interface of the future. This paper attempted to give an overview on these issues and provide a
survey of existing research through a comprehensive reference list.
7

References

[1] D. Te’eni, J. Carey and P. Zhang, Human Computer Interaction: Developing Effective
Organizational Information Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken (2007).
[2] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective
Human-Computer Interaction (4th edition), Pearson/Addison-Wesley, Boston (2004).
[3] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco (1994).
[4] D. Te’eni, “Designs that fit: an overview of fit conceptualization in HCI”, in P. Zhang and
D. Galletta (eds), Human-Computer Interaction and Management Information Systems:
Foundations, M.E. Sharpe, Armonk (2006).
[5] A. Chapanis, Man Machine Engineering, Wadsworth, Belmont (1965).
[6] D. Norman, “Cognitive Engineering”, in D. Norman and S. Draper (eds), User Centered
Design: New Perspective on Human-Computer Interaction, Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale
(1986).
[7] R.W. Picard, Affective Computing, MIT Press, Cambridge (1997).
[8] J.S. Greenstein, “Pointing devices”, in M.G. Helander, T.K. Landauer and P. Prabhu
(eds), Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam (1997).
[9] B.A. Myers, “A brief history of human-computer interaction technology”, ACM
interactions, 5(2), pp 44-54 (1998).
[10]

B. Shneiderman, Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-

Computer Interaction (3rd edition), Addison Wesley Longman, Reading (1998).
[11]

A. Murata, “An experimental evaluation of mouse, joystick, joycard, lightpen,

trackball and touchscreen for Pointing - Basic Study on Human Interface Design”,
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
1991, pp 123-127 (1991).
[12]

L.R. Rabiner, Fundamentals of Speech Recognition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs

(1993).

153

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

[13]

C.M. Karat, J. Vergo and D. Nahamoo, “Conversational interface technologies”, in

J.A. Jacko and A. Sears (eds), The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook:
Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Application, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah (2003).
[14]

S. Brewster, “Non speech auditory output”, in J.A. Jacko and A. Sears (eds), The

Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and
Emerging Application, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah (2003).
[15]

G. Robles-De-La-Torre, “The Importance of the sense of touch in virtual and real

environments”, IEEE Multimedia 13(3), Special issue on Haptic User Interfaces for
Multimedia Systems, pp 24-30 (2006).
[16]

V. Hayward, O.R. Astley, M. Cruz-Hernandez, D. Grant and G. Robles-De-La-Torre,

“Haptic interfaces and devices”, Sensor Review 24(1), pp 16-29 (2004).
[17]

J. Vince, Introduction to Virtual Reality, Springer, London (2004).

[18]

H. Iwata, “Haptic interfaces”, in J.A. Jacko and A. Sears (eds), The Human-Computer

Interaction

Handbook:

Fundamentals,

Evolving

Technologies,

and

Emerging

Application, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah (2003).
[19]

W. Barfield and T. Caudell, Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and Augmented

Reality, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah (2001).
[20]

M.D. Yacoub, Wireless Technology: Protocols, Standards, and Techniques, CRC

Press, London (2002).
[21]

K. McMenemy and S. Ferguson, A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Virtual Reality, A K Peters,

Wellesley (2007).
[22]

Global Positioning System, “Home page”, http://www.gps.gov/, visited on

10/10/2007.
[23]

S.G. Burnay, T.L. Williams and C.H. Jones, Applications of Thermal Imaging, A.

Hilger, Bristol (1988).
[24]

J. Y. Chai, P. Hong and M. X. Zhou, “A probabilistic approach to reference resolution

in multimodal user interfaces”, Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, pp 70-77 (2004).
[25]

E.A. Bretz, “When work is fun and games”, IEEE Spectrum, 39(12), pp 50-50 (2002).

[26]

ExtremeTech,

“Canesta

says

“Virtual

Keyboard”

is reality”,

http://www.extremetech.com/article2/0,1558,539778,00.asp, visited on 15/10/2007.

154

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

[27]

G. Riva, F. Vatalaro, F. Davide and M. Alaniz, Ambient Intelligence: The Evolution of

Technology, Communication and Cognition towards the Future of HCI, IOS Press,
Fairfax (2005).
[28]

M.T. Maybury and W. Wahlster, Readings in Intelligent User Interfaces, Morgan

Kaufmann Press, San Francisco (1998).
[29]

A. Kirlik, Adaptive Perspectives on Human-Technology Interaction, Oxford

University Press, Oxford (2006).
[30]

S.L. Oviatt, P. Cohen, L. Wu, J. Vergo, L. Duncan, B. Suhm, J. Bers, T. Holzman, T.

Winograd, J. Landay, J. Larson and D. Ferro, “Designing the user interface for
multimodal speech and pen-based gesture applications: state-of-the-art systems and future
research directions”, Human-Computer Interaction, 15, pp 263-322 (2000).
[31]

D.M. Gavrila, “The visual analysis of human movement: a survey”, Computer Vision

and Image Understanding, 73(1), pp 82-98 (1999).
[32]

L.E. Sibert and R.J.K. Jacob, “Evaluation of eye gaze interaction”, Conference of

Human-Factors in Computing Systems, pp 281-288 (2000).
[33]

Various Authors, “Adaptive, intelligent and emotional user interfaces”, Part II of HCI

Intelligent Multimodal Interaction Environments, 12th International Conference, HCI
International 2007 (Proceedings Part III), Springer Berlin, Heidelberg (2007).
[34]

M.N. Huhns and M.P. Singh (eds), Readings in Agents, Morgan Kaufmann,

San Francisco (1998).
[35]

C.S. Wasson, System Analysis, Design, and Development: Concepts, Principles, and

Practices, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken (2006).
[36]

A. Jaimes and N. Sebe, “Multimodal human computer interaction: a survey”,

Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 108(1-2), pp 116-134 (2007).
[37]

I. Cohen, N. Sebe, A. Garg, L. Chen and T.S. Huang, “Facial expression recognition

from video sequences: temporal and static modeling”, Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, 91(1-2), pp 160-187 (2003).
[38]

B. Fasel and J. Luettin, “Automatic facial expression analysis: a survey”, Pattern

Recognition, 36, pp 259-275 (2003).
[39]

M. Pantic and L.J.M. Rothkrantz, “Automatic analysis of facial expressions: the state

of the art”, IEEE Transactions on PAMI, 22(12), pp 1424-1445 (2000).

155

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

[40]

J.K. Aggarwal and Q. Cai, “Human motion analysis: a review”, Computer Vision and

Image Understanding, 73(3), pp 428-440 (1999).
[41]

S. Kettebekov and R. Sharma, “Understanding gestures in multimodal human

computer interaction”, International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 9(2), pp
205-223 (2000).
[42]

Y. Wu and T. Huang., “Vision-based gesture recognition: a review”, in A. Braffort, R.

Gherbi, S. Gibet, J. Richardson and D. Teil (eds), Gesture-Based Communication in
Human-Computer Interaction, volume 1739 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg (1999).
[43]

T. Kirishima, K. Sato and K. Chihara, “Real-time gesture recognition by learning and

selective control of visual interest points”, IEEE Transactions on PAMI, 27(3), pp 351364 (2005).
[44]

R. Ruddaraju, A. Haro, K. Nagel, Q. Tran, I. Essa, G. Abowd and E. Mynatt,

“Perceptual user interfaces using vision-based eye tracking”, Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, Vancouver, pp 227-233 (2003).
[45]

A.T. Duchowski, “A breadth-first survey of eye tracking applications”, Behavior

Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 34(4), pp 455-470 (2002).
[46]

P. Rubin, E. Vatikiotis-Bateson and C. Benoit (eds.), “Special issue on audio-visual

speech processing”, Speech Communication, 26, pp 1-2 (1998).
[47]

J.P. Campbell Jr., “Speaker recognition: a tutorial”, Proceedings of IEEE, 85(9), pp

1437-1462 (1997).
[48]

P.Y. Oudeyer, “The production and recognition of emotions in speech: features and

algorithms”, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 59(1-2), pp 157-183
(2003).
[49]

L.S. Chen, Joint Processing of Audio-Visual Information for the Recognition of

Emotional Expressions in Human-Computer Interaction, PhD thesis, UIUC, (2000).
[50]

M. Schröder, D. Heylen and I. Poggi, “Perception of non-verbal emotional listener

feedback”, Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2006, Dresden, Germany, pp 43-46 (2006).
[51]

M.J. Lyons, M. Haehnel and N. Tetsutani, “Designing, playing, and performing, with

a vision-based mouth interface”, Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces
for Nusical Expression, Montreal, pp 116-121 (2003).

156

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

[52]

D. Göger, K. Weiss, C. Burghart and H. Wörn, “Sensitive skin for a humanoid robot”,

Human-Centered Robotic Systems (HCRS’06), Munich, (2006).
[53]

O. Khatib, O. Brock, K.S. Chang, D. Ruspini, L. Sentis and S. Viji, “Human-centered

robotics and interactive haptic simulation”, International Journal of Robotics Research,
23(2), pp 167-178 (2004).
[54]

C. Burghart, O. Schorr, S. Yigit, N. Hata, K. Chinzei, A. Timofeev, R. Kikinis, H.

Wörn and U. Rembold, “A multi-agent system architecture for man-machine interaction
in computer aided surgery”, Proceedings of the 16th IAR Annual Meeting, Strasburg, pp
117-123 (2001).
[55]

A. Legin, A. Rudnitskaya, B. Seleznev and Yu. Vlasov, “Electronic tongue for quality

assessment of ethanol, vodka and eau-de-vie”, Analytica Chimica Acta, 534, pp 129-135
(2005).
[56]

S. Oviatt, “Multimodal interfaces”, in J.A. Jacko and A. Sears (eds), The Human-

Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging
Application, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah (2003).
[57]

R.A. Bolt, “Put-that-there: voice and gesture at the graphics interface”, Proceedings of

the 7th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, Seattle,
Washington, United States, pp 262-270 (1980).
[58]

M. Johnston and S. Bangalore, “MATCHKiosk: a multimodal interactive city guide”,

Proceedings of the ACL 2004 on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
Barcelona, Spain, Article No. 33, (2004).
[59]

I. McCowan, D. Gatica-Perez, S. Bengio, G. Lathoud, M. Barnard and D. Zhang,

“Automatic analysis of multimodal group actions in meetings”, IEEE Transactions on
PAMI, 27(3), pp 305-317 (2005).
[60]

S. Meyer and A. Rakotonirainy, “A Survey of research on context-aware homes”,

Australasian Information Security Workshop Conference on ACSW Frontiers, pp 159-168
(2003).
[61]

P. Smith, M. Shah and N.D.V. Lobo, “Determining driver visual attention with one

camera”, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 4(4), pp 205-218
(2003).
[62]

K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals, MIT Press,

Cambridge (2003).

157

FAKHREDDINE KARRAY ET., AL., HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION: OVERVIEW ON STATE OF THE ART

[63]

Y. Arafa and A. Mamdani, “Building multi-modal personal sales agents as interfaces

to E-commerce applications”, Proceedings of the 6th International Computer Science
Conference on Active Media Technology, pp 113-133 (2001).
[64]

Y. Kuno, N. Shimada and Y. Shirai, “Look where you’re going: a robotic wheelchair

based on the integration of human and environmental observations”, IEEE Robotics and
Automation, 10(1), pp 26-34 (2003).
[65]

A. Ronzhin and A. Karpov, “Assistive multimodal system based on speech

recognition and head tracking”, Proceedings of 13th European Signal Processing
Conference, Antalya (2005).
[66]

M. Pantic, A. Pentland, A. Nijholt and T. Huang, “Human computing and machine

understanding of human behavior: a survey” Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, Banff, Alberta, Canada, pp 239-248 (2006).
[67]

A. Kapoor, W. Burleson and R.W. Picard, “Automatic prediction of frustration”,

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 65, pp 724-736 (2007).
[68]

H. Gunes and M. Piccardi, “Bi-modal emotion recognition from expressive face and

body gestures”, Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 30, pp 1334-1345
(2007).
[69]

C. Busso, Z. Deng, S. Yildirim, M. Bulut, C.M. Lee, A. Kazemzadeh, S. Lee, U.

Neumann and S. Narayanan, “Analysis of emotion recognition using facial expressions,
speech and multimodal information”, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Multimodal Interfaces, State College, PA, USA, pp 205-211 (2004).
[70]

M. Johnston, P.R. Cohen, D. McGee, S.L. Oviatt, J.A. Pittman and I. Smith,

“Unification-based multimodal integration”, Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 281-288 (1997).
[71]

D. Perzanowski, A. Schultz, W. Adams, E. Marsh and M. Bugajska, “Building a

multimodal human-robot interface”, Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 16, pp 16-21 (2001).
[72]

H. Holzapfel, K. Nickel and R. Stiefelhagen, “Implementation and evaluation of a

constraint-based multimodal fusion system for speech and 3D pointing gestures”,
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, pp 175-182
(2004).

158

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SMART SENSING AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, VOL. 1, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

[73]

Brown University, Biology and Medicine, “Robotic Surgery: Neuro-Surgery”,

http://biomed.brown.edu/Courses/BI108/BI108_2005_Groups/04/neurology.html, visited
on 15/10/2007.

159

